# Micro-frontends Orchestration

## Architecturals Concepts Resume

Host: The shell. The first who loads. Responsible to organize and orchestrate the calls.

Remote: The micro-frontend it self. The independent application to be consumed

RemoteEntry: The entry point, basically tells what the microfrontend is, and what needs.

Dynamic runtime: The host only knows what it needs and loads the remote modules only when they are needed, instead of compiling and building everything together.

## Module Federation

Multiple separate builds should form a single application. These separate builds act like containers and can expose and consume code among themselves, creating a single, unified application.

This is often known as Micro-Frontends, but is not limited to that.

### Components

- Local Modules

Common modules that be part of it the actual build from the project.

- Remote Modules

Isn´t part of the actual build but are loaded by a remote container.

### Containers

The load of remote modules are asynchronous. When the code consumes a remote, this async search it's triggered by chunk loading with the `import()`. This cycle are divided by two steps:

1. loading the module(async)
2. evaluating the module(sync)

Looking through this every applications compiles and acts simultaneously as a container (that can expose modules) and as a consumer (read modules from others containers). They also can be nested and have dependencies between each other.

### Shared Modules

To avoid a lot of re-downloads of common libs that are in more than one container, we have the shared modules. When initializing the applications can share a unique scope. If a module already being loaded by the host, the container module it's ignored to avoid duplicity.

### Building blocks

- ContainerPlugin (low level)

This plugin creates an additional container entry with the specified exposed modules.

- ContainerReferencePlugin (low level)

This plugin adds specific references to containers as externals and allows to import remote modules from these containers. It also calls the override API of these containers to provide overrides to them. Local overrides (via `__webpack_override__` or override API when build is also a container) and specified overrides are provided to all referenced containers.

- ModuleFederationPlugin (high level)

ModuleFederationPlugin combines `ContainerPlugin` and `ContainerReferencePlugin`.

### Use Cases

- **Builds separated by page**: Each page of a SPA is generated in a separate build with its specific dependencies
  - A central application (“shell” or application shell) manages global routes and dynamically loads each page as a remote module
This allows teams to update and deploy individual pages without having to redeploy the entire system
- **Shared component library**
  - A design system component library is compiled and made available as a remote container and all applications in the ecosystem consume these components directly from it. If an update or fix is published to the library, all applications automatically begin using the new version the next time they load, without needing to undergo a new local compilation

## Concept goals

- It should be possible to expose and consume any module type that webpack supports.
- Chunk loading should load everything needed in parallel (web: single round-trip to server).
- Control from consumer to container
  - Overriding modules is a one-directional operation.
  - Sibling containers cannot override each other's modules.
- Concept should be environment-independent.
  - Usable in web, Node.js, etc.
- Relative and absolute request in shared:
  - Will always be provided, even if not used.
  - Will resolve relative to config.context.
  - Does not use a requiredVersion by default.
- Module requests in shared:
  - Are only provided when they are used.
  - Will match all used equal module requests in your build.
  - Will provide all matching modules.
  - Will extract requiredVersion from package.json at this position in the graph.
  - Could provide and consume multiple different versions when you have nested node_modules.
- Module requests with trailing / in shared will match all module requests with this prefix.

## Module Federation vs Native Federation

Modern browsers now support features:

- ES Modules
- Dynamic import()
- Import Maps

The Native Federation use this capabilities to allow applications to load remote modules without relying on Webpack's runtime. Instead of exposing a remoteEntry.js generated by Webpack, the host resolves remote applications through native browser mechanisms.

## Concepts to Remember

- Micro-Frontends define the architectural style.
- Module Federation is one implementation of that architecture.
- Native Federation is a newer implementation based on browser standards.

Both aim to enable:

1. Independent development and deployment
2. Runtime loading
3. Shared dependencies
4. Scalable frontend architectures

The choice between them depends more on the situation. If we are maintaining maybe it's worth to keep Module, If are a new project go for Native.

All information was obtained from <https://webpack.js.org/> and <https://native-federation.com/>
